Move KEP 2340 to Beta (#4134)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/2340-Consistent-reads-from-cache/README.md

### Consistent reads from cache

To serve a consistent view from the watch cache, we first need to make a consistent (quorum) read.
We can use the getCurrentResourceVersionFromStorage function, which was added as part of the [Watch-List KEP].
This function makes a range quorum request that is expected to return no data, but will return the latest resource version.
The acquired resource version can be passed to the waitUntilFreshAndBlock function to wait until the watch cache is ready to serve.

Just waiting for a watch event with a fresh enough resource version would be enough if the watch was observing all changes in etcd.
However, the kube-apiserver establishes a separate watch for each resource. 
For resources with infrequent changes, there is no guarantee that a watch event will be delivered at all.

To handle this case, we propose that the watch cache "request progress" of the watch.
This is an etcd feature added in v3.4, that is not yet used by Kubernetes. 

> Iit allows clients to get an immediate "progress notification" event on watch. 

Reviewer: nit: It

Author: Done

A progress notification informs the client about the progress of the watch, even if there have been no updates to the watched keys.
For support of Kubernetes clusters using etcd v3.3, see "What if the watch cache is stale?" section.

A single request is not enough to ensure that the wait on resource version terminates.
If etcd receives a burst of events, the watch might be in the middle of processing a large batch of events when the watch cache requests progress.
The resulting progress notification will return a resource version earlier than requested, which could cause an infinite wait if there are no follow-up events.

> To rely on progress notification for freshness, the watch cache will periodically (every 100ms) request progress until it reaches the requested revision.

Reviewer: or the request times out

Author: Done

  - Wait for the watch to catch up to the revision.
  - Remove a "waiting read".
- If the block times out, the request will result in rejection. (see "What if the watch cache is stale?" section for details)

Consistent GET requests will continue to be served directly from etcd. We will
only serve consistent LIST requests from cache.

[Watch-List KEP]: /keps/sig-api-machinery/3157-watch-list

### Bug in etcd progress notification

Only recently community discovered a bug [etcd-io/etcd#15220] for requesting progress notification.
This bug causes a race between sending an event and progress notification with the same revision.
Normally we would expect to event to always come first, however due to the bug, progress notification might be sent first.
Serving a consistent lists in that situation could result in returning too early and missing the event.
The bug was only fixed in v3.4.25 and v3.5.8 (4 months old), which is too fresh for Kubernetes to not handle.

We propose to implement a direct mitigation for this bug. 
Watch cache will not trust the last revision send by progress notification.

> When it receives a progress notification, watch cache would reduce the received resourceVersion by one, and save it instead of the original one.

Reviewer: Do we somehow distinguish "periodic" progress notifications from the "explicitly requested" one?

> To prevent infinite wait on resources with no change, we will trust a second progress notification with a patching resource version.

Reviewer: So effectively the check is:
```
if wc.resourceVersion < progressNotifyRV {
  wc.resourceVersion = progressNotifyRV - 1
} else {
  wc.resourceVersion = max(wc.resourceVersion, progressNotify)
```

right?

It potentially adds 100ms additional latency, but I think it's acceptable...

The only question I have is - why do we have guarantee that the second notification cannot suffer from the exact same problem?

Reviewer: I still don't fully understand why the second notification cannot suffer from the same problem...

IIUC, the problem is a race [between sending the event and the progress-notify].

So sending another one using the same mechanism 100ms later hugely reduces the probability, but in theory in super heavily loaded environment doesn't reduce it down to zero, no?

Author: Our current assumption is that etcd race is just between event and single progress notification sharing the same revision. Question is what happens if there are multiple progress notification requested in quick succession and whether it can happen in Kubernetes.  

Will do some experiments and let you know.

Reviewer: So where we are with it?

Author: Run robustness tests with progress notification requested every 10 Microseconds (lower caused a deadlock, didn't investigate why). Results:
```
    137 progress_notify, rev: 1
     67 progress_notify, rev: 2
    144 progress_notify, rev: 3
      3 progress_notify, rev: 4
      2 progress_notify, rev: 5
      1 progress_notify, rev: 6
     12 progress_notify, rev: 7
     29 progress_notify, rev: 8
     54 progress_notify, rev: 9
    229 progress_notify, rev: 10
    153 progress_notify, rev: 11
     61 progress_notify, rev: 12
      2 progress_notify, rev: 13
     63 progress_notify, rev: 14
      9 progress_notify, rev: 15
      8 progress_notify, rev: 16
     30 progress_notify, rev: 17
     62 progress_notify, rev: 18
      6 progress_notify, rev: 19
      1 progress_notify, rev: 20
     87 progress_notify, rev: 21
     56 progress_notify, rev: 22
      1 progress_notify, rev: 23
      4 progress_notify, rev: 24
      1 progress_notify, rev: 25
      1 progress_notify, rev: 26
     77 progress_notify, rev: 27
     82 progress_notify, rev: 28
      4 progress_notify, rev: 29
      9 progress_notify, rev: 30
     46 progress_notify, rev: 31
     47 progress_notify, rev: 32
     60 progress_notify, rev: 33
      1 progress_notify, rev: 34
     80 progress_notify, rev: 35
      1 progress_notify, rev: 36
     61 progress_notify, rev: 37
     69 progress_notify, rev: 38
    241 progress_notify, rev: 39
     77 progress_notify, rev: 40
     13 progress_notify, rev: 41
     62 progress_notify, rev: 42
      4 progress_notify, rev: 43
     70 progress_notify, rev: 44
     66 progress_notify, rev: 45
      5 progress_notify, rev: 46
      4 progress_notify, rev: 47
     61 progress_notify, rev: 48
     70 progress_notify, rev: 49
      9 progress_notify, rev: 50
     76 progress_notify, rev: 51
     12 progress_notify, rev: 52
     60 progress_notify, rev: 53
      1 progress_notify, rev: 54
      4 progress_notify, rev: 55
     70 progress_notify, rev: 56
      5 progress_notify, rev: 57
      1 progress_notify, rev: 58
     68 progress_notify, rev: 59
     73 progress_notify, rev: 60
     21 progress_notify, rev: 61
     38 progress_notify, rev: 62
    421 progress_notify, rev: 63
      3 progress_notify, rev: 64
      4 progress_notify, rev: 65
      4 progress_notify, rev: 66
     41 progress_notify, rev: 67
     57 progress_notify, rev: 68
    113 progress_notify, rev: 69
      1 event, rev: 2
      1 event, rev: 3
      1 event, rev: 4
      1 event, rev: 5
      1 event, rev: 6
      1 event, rev: 7
      1 event, rev: 8
      1 event, rev: 9
      1 event, rev: 10
      1 event, rev: 11
      1 event, rev: 12
      1 event, rev: 13
      1 event, rev: 14
      1 event, rev: 15
      1 event, rev: 16
      1 event, rev: 17
      1 event, rev: 18
      1 event, rev: 19
      1 event, rev: 20
      1 event, rev: 21
      1 event, rev: 22
      1 event, rev: 23
      1 event, rev: 24
      1 event, rev: 25
      1 event, rev: 26
      1 event, rev: 27
      1 event, rev: 28
      2 event, rev: 29
      1 event, rev: 30
      1 event, rev: 31
      1 event, rev: 32
      1 event, rev: 33
      1 event, rev: 34
      4 event, rev: 35
      1 event, rev: 36
      1 event, rev: 37
      1 event, rev: 38
      1 event, rev: 39
      3 event, rev: 40
      1 event, rev: 41
      2 event, rev: 42
      1 event, rev: 43
      1 event, rev: 44
      3 event, rev: 45
      1 event, rev: 46
      1 event, rev: 47
      1 event, rev: 48
      1 event, rev: 49
      1 event, rev: 50
      1 event, rev: 51
      1 event, rev: 52
      1 event, rev: 53
      1 event, rev: 54
      1 event, rev: 55
      1 event, rev: 56
      1 event, rev: 57
      1 event, rev: 58
      1 event, rev: 59
      2 event, rev: 60
      1 event, rev: 61
      1 event, rev: 62
      1 event, rev: 63
      1 event, rev: 64
      1 event, rev: 65
      1 event, rev: 66
      1 event, rev: 67
      1 event, rev: 68
      3 event, rev: 69
    123 progress_notify, rev: 69
      1 event, rev: 70
      5 progress_notify, rev: 70
      1 event, rev: 71
      1 event, rev: 72
     96 progress_notify, rev: 72
      1 event, rev: 73
    140 progress_notify, rev: 73
      1 event, rev: 74
      6 progress_notify, rev: 74
      1 event, rev: 75
     11 progress_notify, rev: 75
      1 event, rev: 76
      1 progress_notify, rev: 75
      3 progress_notify, rev: 76
      1 event, rev: 77
     76 progress_notify, rev: 77
      1 event, rev: 78
    256 progress_notify, rev: 78
      1 event, rev: 79
      4 progress_notify, rev: 79
      1 event, rev: 80
      2 progress_notify, rev: 79
      1 progress_notify, rev: 80
      1 event, rev: 81
      1 progress_notify, rev: 80
      7 progress_notify, rev: 81
      1 event, rev: 82
     64 progress_notify, rev: 82
      3 event, rev: 83
    267 progress_notify, rev: 83
      1 event, rev: 84
      4 progress_notify, rev: 84
      1 event, rev: 85
     19 progress_notify, rev: 85
      1 event, rev: 86
      1 progress_notify, rev: 85
     70 progress_notify, rev: 86
      4 event, rev: 87
      5 progress_notify, rev: 87
      1 event, rev: 88
      5 progress_notify, rev: 88
      1 event, rev: 89
     83 progress_notify, rev: 89
      2 event, rev: 90
     66 progress_notify, rev: 90
      1 event, rev: 91
      2 progress_notify, rev: 90
      3 progress_notify, rev: 91
      1 event, rev: 92
      1 event, rev: 93
      1 progress_notify, rev: 92
     66 progress_notify, rev: 93
      1 event, rev: 94
      2 progress_notify, rev: 94
      1 event, rev: 95
     64 progress_notify, rev: 95
      1 event, rev: 96
     65 progress_notify, rev: 96
      1 event, rev: 97
      4 progress_notify, rev: 97
      1 event, rev: 98
    246 progress_notify, rev: 98
      1 event, rev: 99
      1 progress_notify, rev: 99
      1 event, rev: 100
      1 progress_notify, rev: 99
      4 progress_notify, rev: 100
      1 event, rev: 101
     67 progress_notify, rev: 101
      1 event, rev: 102
      2 progress_notify, rev: 102
      1 event, rev: 103
     61 progress_notify, rev: 103
      1 progress_notify, rev: 104
      1 event, rev: 104
    219 progress_notify, rev: 104
      1 event, rev: 105
    388 progress_notify, rev: 105
      1 event, rev: 106
    380 progress_notify, rev: 106
      1 event, rev: 107
    856 progress_notify, rev: 107
      1 event, rev: 108
    143 progress_notify, rev: 108
      1 event, rev: 109
    577 progress_notify, rev: 109
      1 event, rev: 110
    195 progress_notify, rev: 110
      1 event, rev: 111
    338 progress_notify, rev: 111
      1 event, rev: 112
    182 progress_notify, rev: 112
      1 event, rev: 113
    582 progress_notify, rev: 113
      2 event, rev: 114
    687 progress_notify, rev: 114
      1 event, rev: 115
    364 progress_notify, rev: 115
      1 event, rev: 116
    192 progress_notify, rev: 116
      1 event, rev: 117
    772 progress_notify, rev: 117
      1 event, rev: 118
   1305 progress_notify, rev: 118
      1 event, rev: 119
      1 progress_notify, rev: 118
    564 progress_notify, rev: 119
      1 event, rev: 120
      1 progress_notify, rev: 119
    186 progress_notify, rev: 120
      3 event, rev: 121
    381 progress_notify, rev: 121
      1 event, rev: 122
    202 progress_notify, rev: 122
      1 event, rev: 123
    158 progress_notify, rev: 123
      1 event, rev: 124
    553 progress_notify, rev: 124
      1 event, rev: 125
     70 progress_notify, rev: 125
      2 event, rev: 126
   1053 progress_notify, rev: 126
      1 event, rev: 127
      3 progress_notify, rev: 126
    201 progress_notify, rev: 127
      1 event, rev: 128
      1 progress_notify, rev: 127
    376 progress_notify, rev: 128
      1 event, rev: 129
    558 progress_notify, rev: 129
      1 event, rev: 130
   1061 progress_notify, rev: 130
      1 event, rev: 131
    728 progress_notify, rev: 131
      1 event, rev: 132
      1 progress_notify, rev: 131
    593 progress_notify, rev: 132
      1 event, rev: 133
    216 progress_notify, rev: 133
      1 event, rev: 134
    207 progress_notify, rev: 134
      1 event, rev: 135
    195 progress_notify, rev: 135
      1 event, rev: 136
    561 progress_notify, rev: 136
      1 event, rev: 137
    375 progress_notify, rev: 137
      1 event, rev: 138
      1 progress_notify, rev: 137
    382 progress_notify, rev: 138
      1 event, rev: 139
    332 progress_notify, rev: 139
      1 event, rev: 140
    162 progress_notify, rev: 140
      1 event, rev: 141
    597 progress_notify, rev: 141
      1 event, rev: 142
      1 progress_notify, rev: 141
    613 progress_notify, rev: 142
      2 event, rev: 143
      1 progress_notify, rev: 142
    729 progress_notify, rev: 143
      1 event, rev: 144
    158 progress_notify, rev: 144
      1 event, rev: 145
   1061 progress_notify, rev: 145
      1 event, rev: 146
    175 progress_notify, rev: 146
      1 event, rev: 147
      1 progress_notify, rev: 146
    408 progress_notify, rev: 147
      2 event, rev: 148
    545 progress_notify, rev: 148
      1 event, rev: 149
      1 progress_notify, rev: 148
    191 progress_notify, rev: 149
      1 event, rev: 150
    250 progress_notify, rev: 150
      1 event, rev: 151
     10 progress_notify, rev: 150
    282 progress_notify, rev: 151
      1 event, rev: 152
    190 progress_notify, rev: 152
      3 event, rev: 153
    791 progress_notify, rev: 153
      1 event, rev: 154
    172 progress_notify, rev: 154
      1 event, rev: 155
    194 progress_notify, rev: 155
      1 event, rev: 156
    909 progress_notify, rev: 156
      1 event, rev: 157
    354 progress_notify, rev: 157
      2 event, rev: 158
    187 progress_notify, rev: 158
      1 event, rev: 159
    399 progress_notify, rev: 159
      1 event, rev: 160
    169 progress_notify, rev: 160
      1 event, rev: 161
    177 progress_notify, rev: 161
      1 event, rev: 162
    718 progress_notify, rev: 162
      1 event, rev: 163
    230 progress_notify, rev: 163
      1 event, rev: 164
    713 progress_notify, rev: 164
      1 event, rev: 165
    548 progress_notify, rev: 165
      1 event, rev: 166
      2 progress_notify, rev: 165
   1301 progress_notify, rev: 166
      1 event, rev: 167
    361 progress_notify, rev: 167
      1 event, rev: 168
    192 progress_notify, rev: 168
      1 event, rev: 169
      1 progress_notify, rev: 168
     50 progress_notify, rev: 169
      1 event, rev: 170
      9 progress_notify, rev: 169
     47 progress_notify, rev: 170
      1 event, rev: 171
     12 progress_notify, rev: 170
    497 progress_notify, rev: 171
      1 event, rev: 172
    178 progress_notify, rev: 172
      1 event, rev: 173
    177 progress_notify, rev: 173
      1 event, rev: 174
    179 progress_notify, rev: 174
      3 event, rev: 175
    211 progress_notify, rev: 175
      1 event, rev: 176
      4 progress_notify, rev: 175
   1108 progress_notify, rev: 176
      1 event, rev: 177
    173 progress_notify, rev: 177
      1 event, rev: 178
     28 progress_notify, rev: 178
      1 event, rev: 179
     17 progress_notify, rev: 178
      2 progress_notify, rev: 179
      2 progress_notify, rev: 180
      1 event, rev: 180
     17 progress_notify, rev: 180
      1 event, rev: 181
      4 progress_notify, rev: 180
     38 progress_notify, rev: 181
      1 event, rev: 182
      1 progress_notify, rev: 181
     12 progress_notify, rev: 182
      1 event, rev: 183
      1 progress_notify, rev: 182
    158 progress_notify, rev: 183
      1 event, rev: 184
     16 progress_notify, rev: 183
    118 progress_notify, rev: 184
      1 event, rev: 185
      8 progress_notify, rev: 185
      1 event, rev: 186
     81 progress_notify, rev: 186
      1 event, rev: 187
     71 progress_notify, rev: 187
      1 event, rev: 188
      1 progress_notify, rev: 187
     81 progress_notify, rev: 188
      1 event, rev: 189
     70 progress_notify, rev: 189
      1 event, rev: 190
      1 progress_notify, rev: 189
      1 event, rev: 191
      1 progress_notify, rev: 190
     11 progress_notify, rev: 191
      1 event, rev: 192
      1 progress_notify, rev: 192
      1 event, rev: 193
      1 progress_notify, rev: 192
      1 progress_notify, rev: 193
      1 event, rev: 194
     61 progress_notify, rev: 194
      1 event, rev: 195
     64 progress_notify, rev: 195
      1 event, rev: 196
      7 progress_notify, rev: 196
      4 event, rev: 197
      4 progress_notify, rev: 197
      1 event, rev: 198
    108 progress_notify, rev: 198
      1 event, rev: 199
     56 progress_notify, rev: 199
      1 event, rev: 200
      8 progress_notify, rev: 200
      1 event, rev: 201
     63 progress_notify, rev: 201
      1 event, rev: 202
    258 progress_notify, rev: 202
      1 event, rev: 203
      4 progress_notify, rev: 203
      1 event, rev: 204
      6 progress_notify, rev: 204
      1 event, rev: 205
     77 progress_notify, rev: 205
      1 event, rev: 206
     63 progress_notify, rev: 206
      1 event, rev: 207
      3 progress_notify, rev: 207
      1 event, rev: 208
     96 progress_notify, rev: 208
      1 event, rev: 209
    242 progress_notify, rev: 209
      1 event, rev: 210
      3 progress_notify, rev: 210
      3 event, rev: 211
      5 progress_notify, rev: 210
      3 progress_notify, rev: 211
      1 event, rev: 212
      2 progress_notify, rev: 211
     61 progress_notify, rev: 212
      1 event, rev: 213
     64 progress_notify, rev: 213
      1 event, rev: 214
      1 event, rev: 215
     17 progress_notify, rev: 215
      1 event, rev: 216
      2 progress_notify, rev: 215
     10 progress_notify, rev: 216
      1 event, rev: 217
     67 progress_notify, rev: 217
      1 event, rev: 218
     62 progress_notify, rev: 218
      2 event, rev: 219
      6 progress_notify, rev: 219
      1 event, rev: 220
      3 progress_notify, rev: 220
      1 event, rev: 221
     69 progress_notify, rev: 221
      1 event, rev: 222
     66 progress_notify, rev: 222
      1 event, rev: 223
      6 progress_notify, rev: 223
      1 event, rev: 224
      6 progress_notify, rev: 224
      1 event, rev: 225
      1 progress_notify, rev: 224
      1 event, rev: 226
      1 progress_notify, rev: 225
     67 progress_notify, rev: 226
      1 event, rev: 227
    226 progress_notify, rev: 227
      1 event, rev: 228
      1 progress_notify, rev: 227
     69 progress_notify, rev: 228
      2 event, rev: 229
      2 progress_notify, rev: 229
      1 event, rev: 230
      8 progress_notify, rev: 230
      1 event, rev: 231
    125 progress_notify, rev: 231
      1 event, rev: 232
      1 event, rev: 233
      1 progress_notify, rev: 232
      1 progress_notify, rev: 233
      1 event, rev: 234
      1 progress_notify, rev: 233
      1 event, rev: 235
      1 progress_notify, rev: 234
     58 progress_notify, rev: 235
      1 event, rev: 236
      3 progress_notify, rev: 235
     61 progress_notify, rev: 236
      1 event, rev: 237
      4 progress_notify, rev: 237
      1 event, rev: 238
     73 progress_notify, rev: 238
      1 event, rev: 239
      2 progress_notify, rev: 239
      1 event, rev: 240
     73 progress_notify, rev: 240
      1 event, rev: 241
     74 progress_notify, rev: 241
      1 event, rev: 242
      5 progress_notify, rev: 242
      1 event, rev: 243
     67 progress_notify, rev: 243
      2 progress_notify, rev: 244
      1 event, rev: 244
      2 progress_notify, rev: 244
      2 event, rev: 245
     65 progress_notify, rev: 245
      2 event, rev: 246
     68 progress_notify, rev: 246
      3 event, rev: 247
      3 progress_notify, rev: 247
      1 event, rev: 248
    233 progress_notify, rev: 248
      1 event, rev: 249
     79 progress_notify, rev: 249
      1 event, rev: 250
     21 progress_notify, rev: 250
      1 event, rev: 251
      3 progress_notify, rev: 251
      2 event, rev: 252
      3 progress_notify, rev: 252
      1 event, rev: 253
    174 progress_notify, rev: 253
      1 event, rev: 254
     12 progress_notify, rev: 253
      7 progress_notify, rev: 254
      1 event, rev: 255
     11 progress_notify, rev: 254
     19 progress_notify, rev: 255
      1 event, rev: 256
      7 progress_notify, rev: 255
    284 progress_notify, rev: 256
      4 event, rev: 257
     56 progress_notify, rev: 257
      1 event, rev: 258
      4 progress_notify, rev: 258
      3 event, rev: 259
     68 progress_notify, rev: 259
      1 event, rev: 260
     72 progress_notify, rev: 260
      1 event, rev: 261
      1 progress_notify, rev: 260
      7 progress_notify, rev: 261
      1 event, rev: 262
     67 progress_notify, rev: 262
      2 event, rev: 263
     66 progress_notify, rev: 263
      1 progress_notify, rev: 264
      1 event, rev: 264
     67 progress_notify, rev: 264
      1 event, rev: 265
     63 progress_notify, rev: 265
      1 event, rev: 266
      1 event, rev: 267
      1 progress_notify, rev: 266
      5 progress_notify, rev: 267
      1 event, rev: 268
     63 progress_notify, rev: 268
      1 event, rev: 269
    952 progress_notify, rev: 269
      1 event, rev: 270
    561 progress_notify, rev: 270
      1 event, rev: 271
    366 progress_notify, rev: 271
      1 event, rev: 272
    176 progress_notify, rev: 272
      1 event, rev: 273
    188 progress_notify, rev: 273
      1 event, rev: 274
      2 progress_notify, rev: 273
    349 progress_notify, rev: 274
      1 event, rev: 275
    160 progress_notify, rev: 275
      1 event, rev: 276
      1 progress_notify, rev: 275
    224 progress_notify, rev: 276
      1 event, rev: 277
     12 progress_notify, rev: 276
   1700 progress_notify, rev: 277
      1 event, rev: 278
    604 progress_notify, rev: 278
      1 event, rev: 279
    644 progress_notify, rev: 279
      1 event, rev: 280
    385 progress_notify, rev: 280
      1 event, rev: 281
      1 progress_notify, rev: 280
    267 progress_notify, rev: 281
      1 event, rev: 282
      3 progress_notify, rev: 281
   1864 progress_notify, rev: 282
      1 event, rev: 283
    920 progress_notify, rev: 283
      1 event, rev: 284
    181 progress_notify, rev: 284
      1 event, rev: 285
   1318 progress_notify, rev: 285
      1 event, rev: 286
      6 progress_notify, rev: 285
    641 progress_notify, rev: 286
      1 event, rev: 287
    361 progress_notify, rev: 287
      1 event, rev: 288
    567 progress_notify, rev: 288
      3 event, rev: 289
     73 progress_notify, rev: 289
      1 event, rev: 290
    336 progress_notify, rev: 290
      1 event, rev: 291
    363 progress_notify, rev: 291
      1 event, rev: 292
      1 progress_notify, rev: 291
    784 progress_notify, rev: 292
      1 event, rev: 293
    362 progress_notify, rev: 293
      1 event, rev: 294
    192 progress_notify, rev: 294
      1 event, rev: 295
      1 progress_notify, rev: 294
    249 progress_notify, rev: 295
      1 event, rev: 296
      9 progress_notify, rev: 295
   1120 progress_notify, rev: 296
      3 event, rev: 297
    185 progress_notify, rev: 297
      1 event, rev: 298
   1261 progress_notify, rev: 298
      1 event, rev: 299
    376 progress_notify, rev: 299
      1 event, rev: 300
    174 progress_notify, rev: 300
      1 event, rev: 301
      1 progress_notify, rev: 300
    181 progress_notify, rev: 301
      1 event, rev: 302
    371 progress_notify, rev: 302
      1 event, rev: 303
    567 progress_notify, rev: 303
      1 event, rev: 304
    195 progress_notify, rev: 304
      1 event, rev: 305
   1363 progress_notify, rev: 305
      1 event, rev: 306
   1151 progress_notify, rev: 306
      1 event, rev: 307
    197 progress_notify, rev: 307
      1 event, rev: 308
    352 progress_notify, rev: 308
      1 event, rev: 309
    191 progress_notify, rev: 309
      1 event, rev: 310
      1 progress_notify, rev: 309
    319 progress_notify, rev: 310
      1 event, rev: 311
    183 progress_notify, rev: 311
      1 event, rev: 312
    204 progress_notify, rev: 312
      1 event, rev: 313
    556 progress_notify, rev: 313
      1 event, rev: 314
      1 progress_notify, rev: 313
   1143 progress_notify, rev: 314
      1 event, rev: 315
     70 progress_notify, rev: 315
      1 event, rev: 316
    118 progress_notify, rev: 316
      1 progress_notify, rev: 317
      1 event, rev: 317
    180 progress_notify, rev: 317
      1 event, rev: 318
    377 progress_notify, rev: 318
      1 event, rev: 319
    802 progress_notify, rev: 319
      1 event, rev: 320
     10 progress_notify, rev: 319
    513 progress_notify, rev: 320
      1 event, rev: 321
    189 progress_notify, rev: 321
      1 event, rev: 322
    366 progress_notify, rev: 322
      1 event, rev: 323
      1 progress_notify, rev: 322
    373 progress_notify, rev: 323
      1 event, rev: 324
    195 progress_notify, rev: 324
      1 event, rev: 325
    741 progress_notify, rev: 325
      1 event, rev: 326
    182 progress_notify, rev: 326
      1 event, rev: 327
    209 progress_notify, rev: 327
      1 event, rev: 328
    735 progress_notify, rev: 328
      1 event, rev: 329
      1 progress_notify, rev: 328
    702 progress_notify, rev: 329
      1 event, rev: 330
    149 progress_notify, rev: 330
      2 event, rev: 331
   1125 progress_notify, rev: 331
      1 event, rev: 332
  39861 progress_notify, rev: 332
      1 event, rev: 333
     10 progress_notify, rev: 333
```

  - Wait for watch cache to catch up. If wait times out, reject the request.
    (see "What if the watch cache is stale?" section for details)
  - Remove a "waiting read"
- Serve the request from watch cache

In background, run a dedicated goroutine that will:
- Wait for changes to "waiting read" count.
- Repeat as long there is at least one "waiting read":
  - Send `WatchProgressRequest` request to etcd.
  - Wait 100ms

Consistent GET requests will continue to be served directly from etcd. We will
only serve consistent LIST requests from cache.

[Watch-List KEP]: /keps/sig-api-machinery/3157-watch-list

### Bug in etcd progress notification

Only recently community discovered a bug [etcd-io/etcd#15220] for requesting
progress notification. This bug causes a race between sending an event and
progress notification with the same revision. Normally we would expect to event
to always come first, however due to the bug, progress notification might be
sent first. Serving a consistent lists in that situation could result in
returning too early and missing the event. The bug was only fixed in v3.4.25 and
v3.5.8 (both 9 months old), which is too fresh for Kubernetes to not handle.

> Our tests have shown that with the bug manual progress notification cannot be

Reviewer 2: Clarifying because it came up for me.  This etcd bug results in a client getting incorrect data from the request in a way that the client is unaware of and the server is unaware of.  In other words, a silent data corruption bug that cannot be automatically detect prior to acting upon the corrupted data.

If this were a GA feature, we'd have no choice but to leave it enabled, but because it is a beta feature, we're able to conditionally enable in a way that gives us confidence enabling for beta (data is correct) without risking undetectable failures due to slightly old levels.

Author: Updated the section.

trusted at all. This is a hard blocker to enable consistent reads from cache
for everyone by default.

We propose to implement a safeguard that will prevent enabling
`ConsistentListFromCache` on etcd version with broken progress notification.
During kube-apiserver startup we will verify etcd version by calling `Status`
method and checking etcd patch version. The condition will only pass if all etcd
endpoints have etcd version that includes the fix for [etcd-io/etcd#15220].

As we cannot break users we propose that during Beta, the failed condition will

> cause kube-apiserver to fallback to reading to etcd (as before) and write a warning

Reviewer 2: expanding a couple possible cases here
1. version return not recognized or not etcd - in this case we should warn, but continue with whatever the current value of the featuregate is
2. etcd too old, featuregate not explicitly specified, featuregate not locked to true - disable the featuregate
3. etcd too old, featuregate not explicitly specified, featuregate locked to true - apiserver should fail to start
4. etcd too old, featuregate explicitly enabled - apiserver should fail to start because the user wanted this featuregate and the intent cannot be fulfilled.
5. etcd new enough - use whatever the current value of the featuregate is
6. etcd does not respond (recall we don't have an ordering requirement) -  in this case we should warn, but continue with whatever the current value of the featuregate is

I think that handles all the known cases, prevents the most common failure modes, and doesn't restrict cases where we aren't sure that there is a correctness problem.

Author: How the first and sixth case differ. In both cases we cannot confirm that feature works. Would it be safer to disable the feature gate?

progress notification with the same revision. Normally we would expect to event
to always come first, however due to the bug, progress notification might be
sent first. Serving a consistent lists in that situation could result in
returning too early and missing the event. The bug was only fixed in v3.4.25 and
v3.5.8 (both 9 months old), which is too fresh for Kubernetes to not handle.

Our tests have shown that with the bug manual progress notification cannot be
trusted at all. It causes a silent corruption that cannot be automatically
detected prior to acting upon the corrupted data. For Beta, we propose to
conditionally enable the feature in a way that mitigates the risk of unaware
users stumbling on the bug.

We propose to implement a safeguard that will prevent enabling
`ConsistentListFromCache` on etcd version with broken progress notification.
During kube-apiserver startup we will verify etcd version by calling `Status`
method and checking etcd patch version. The condition will only pass if all etcd
endpoints have etcd version that includes the fix for [etcd-io/etcd#15220].

The proposed behavior of the safeguard for Beta:

> * etcd version could not be acquired - warn and disable the feature

Reviewer 2: I think in this case, both here and for GA, we should 

```suggestion
* etcd version could not be acquired - warn, but continue with whatever the current value of the featuregate is
```

If someone uses not-etcd (kine?), I don't have a desire to break them or add recognition for their versions. They'll get the default server behavior and have to uphold the etcd contract.

Author: Done.

* etcd too old, feature gate not explicitly specified - warn and disable the feature
* etcd too old, feature gate explicitly enabled - abort
* etcd new enough - use whatever the current value of the feature gate is

The proposed behavior of the safeguard for GA (feature gate locked to true):

> * etcd version could not be acquired - abort

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* etcd version could not be acquired - warn, but continue feature enabled
```

rate limiting to prevent cascading failure.  I.e. `Retry-After` HTTP header (for
well behaved clients) and [Priority and Fairness](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md).

For such situations we will provide a dedicated metric to detect a problem,
and a per-request override for debugging. If there is a ongoing problem,
user can reconfigure kube-apiserver to always pass request to etcd by 

> disabling the feature flag. Metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait`

Reviewer: Once it graduates to GA, it's not possible anymore (the FG are LockedToDefault).

Does it mean we should expose an option an explicit flag to disable it?

Author: Not if we block GA on dropping support of supporting etcd v3.3.

Reviewer: Well... maybe, but I'm not fully convinced here.

Author: Or we could introduce a flag, wait for etcd to release v3.8 and deprecate it then.

Reviewer: So we basically need an explicit flag - I would make this explicit (and probably add that explicitly to graduation criteria for GA).

Author: Do we need a feature flag then? Both will flip the same feature.

Reviewer 2: > Do we need a feature flag then? Both will flip the same feature.

FeatureGates force consumers to acknowledge the stability level of the flag they are specifying and provide an easy way to express things like, "only use stable features".  Flags don't allow that, so we require both for server features.

Author: Ok, makes sense. I etcd we use "experimental" flag prefix, but combining flag name with maturity is bad.

will measure wait time experienced by reads for watch cache to become fresh.

> Per request override will be done via a HTTP request header `k8s.io/apiserver/skip-watch-cache`.

Reviewer: Using HTTP headers is not a typical thing to do - the typical thing to do is to extend `ListOptions`

I think it should be ListOptions field, but I will defer the actual response to @deads2k from API approval perspective.

Author: Agree, this is not typical. However, we are about talking about change that is transparent from content perspective. Want to confirm that we need to have a full API change just for debugging.

Reviewer: @deads2k - I would like to get a feedback about it from you

Reviewer 2: Any HTTP header option needs to be described in `ListOptions` (or the appropriate options struct).  This ensures that we know our API surface, it is consistent, and our storage layers properly handle the input.

Once included in our API surface area, this option would persist forever.

Author: As this is a override for the debugging that doesn't change the semantic of the request, it might be reasonable to not include it in `ListOptions`.

> 

Reviewer: I think that summarizing the discussion we had offline why we prefer explicit rather than implicit (behind-the-scenes) fallback would be useful here.

[FTR, my main point were:
1) it gives users full control
2) APF differently estimates the cost of requests from cache vs from etcd, so we would be much more exposed to overloading the control-plane]

Author: Done.

rate limiting to prevent cascading failure.  I.e. `Retry-After` HTTP header (for
well behaved clients) and [Priority and Fairness](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md).

For such situations we will provide a dedicated metric to detect a problem,
and a per-request override for debugging. If there is a ongoing problem,
user can reconfigure kube-apiserver to always pass request to etcd by 
disabling the feature flag. Metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait`
will measure wait time experienced by reads for watch cache to become fresh.
Per request override will be done via a HTTP request header `k8s.io/apiserver/skip-watch-cache`.

Having a manual explicit fallback rather than automatic implicit, gives users

> full control over and ensures accurate APF cost estimates.

Reviewer: Please elaborate more on that - especially why the second one is important one.

Author: Done.

If the fallback is to forward consistent reads to etcd, a cascading failure
is likely to occur if caches become stale and a large number of read requests
are forwarded to etcd.

Since falling back to etcd won't work, we should fail the requests and rely on
rate limiting to prevent cascading failure.  I.e. `Retry-After` HTTP header (for
well-behaved clients) and [Priority and Fairness](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md).

For such situations we will provide users with following tools:
* a dedicated `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric to detect a problem with
  watch cache.
* a per-request override to disable watch cache to allow debugging.

Metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` will measure wait time experienced by 
reads for watch cache to become fresh. If user notices a latency request in
they can use this metric to confirm that the issue is caused by watch cache.

Per request override should allow user to compare request results without
impacting other requests or requiring to redeploy whole cluster. The exact

> details of override API will be clarified during API review. In healthy

Reviewer: IIUC @deads2k wants the ListOptions field, but I would leave it to him to approve during API review.

rate limiting to prevent cascading failure.  I.e. `Retry-After` HTTP header (for
well behaved clients) and [Priority and Fairness](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md).

For such situations we will provide users with following tools:
* a dedicated `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric to detect a problem with
  watch cache.
* a per-request override via `X-DEBUG: NO-WATCH-CACHE` HTTP header for
  debugging.
* an escape hatch `--apiserver-consistent-list-from-cache` flag to disable the
  feature.

Metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` will measure wait time experienced by 
reads for watch cache to become fresh. If user notices a latency request in
they can use this metric to confirm that the issue is caused by watch cache.

> Per request override via an HTTP request header `X-DEBUG: NO-WATCH-CACHE`, 

Author: Right, but on the other hand we don't want to provide stability guarantees for debug level feature. I think we can skip designing the API during the KEP review as the final API shape will be mostly shaped by API review.

I will remove the details about how override will be implemented with note that it will be finalized during API review.

should allow user to compare request results without impacting other requests or
requiring to redeploy whole cluster. We propose to use a header, as we don't
want to create an official API as we don't expect those requests to be ever be 
executed for other purposed than debugging. In healthy situation setting this 
header should not cause any impact on the resulting response, however it might
have performance impact, by increasing load on etcd. To prevent abuse we will
limit access to users with `cluster-admin` role, rejecting the request otherwise.

To execute a request with watch cache disabled:

```shell
kubectl proxy &
curl -H 'X-DEBUG: NO-WATCH-CACHE' http://localhost:8080/api/v1/namespaces/my-ns/pods/my-pod?resourceVersion=0
```

> A `--apiserver-consistent-list-from-cache` flag to disable usage of watch cache

Reviewer 2: We have flags to disable the entire watch cache today.  I understand "what if there is a bug" concern, but rather than grow a permanent flag, I'd like to see us develop confidence and once we have it, remove the featuregate.

If this is born out of a concern for storage backends that might not support all etcd features, I think this is exactly the reason why apimachinery took the position of "etcd is the only backend, you can replace it by replacing the etcd functionality".  If a backend doesn't support the etcd contract, they will need to update to handle it.

Author: Makes sense.

and disable to ensure both configurations work correctly (both with this
feature enabled and disabled)

Benchmark consistent reads from cache against consistent reads.
Added performance tests to https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-scalability-experiments, following 2 scenarios:
* Small objects - 300`000 configmaps each 1KB of size. 
* Large objects - 300 configmaps each 1MB of size.

> In both cases we put load of 1 LIST per second with empty label selector.

Reviewer: This is misleading - I think your selector is selecting "no objects", (whereas empty selector is selecting everything).

Author: True, fixed.

Comparing resource usage and latency with and without consistent list from watch cache enabled.
* 2-10 times reduction in CPU usage

> * 20-50 times reduction of latency

Reviewer: @deads2k @jpbetz - FYI

Reviewer 2: > @deads2k @jpbetz - FYI

Impressive numbers

| ---------------------- | --------------------------- | -------------------------- | ------ | ------ | ---------------- | ------ | ------ | ----------------- | -------- | -------- |
|                        |                             | 50%ile                     | 90%ile | 99%ile | 50%ile           | 90%ile | 99%ile | 50%ile            | 90%ile   | 99%ile   |
| Baseline               | 0                           | 0.10                       | 0.11   | 0.12   | 0.18             | 0.19   | 0.19   | 25.00             | 45.00    | 49.50    |
| Enabled Large Objects  | 1                           | 0.09                       | 0.11   | 0.11   | 0.18             | 0.19   | 0.19   | 25.00             | 45.00    | 49.49    |
| Disabled Large Objects | 1                           | 3.13                       | 3.14   | 3.16   | 1.73             | 16.16  | 16.37  | 1438.49           | 1856.13  | 1985.61  |
| Enabled Small Objects  | 1                           | 0.63                       | 0.64   | 0.68   | 0.23             | 2.11   | 2.16   | 499.32            | 582.04   | 648.00   |

> | Disabled Small Objects | 0.86                        | 6.92                       | 70.85  | 71.41  | 3.57             | 3.72   | 3.75   | 10493.83          | 17910.71 | 21800.00 |

Reviewer: Link to test jobs

Author: Done

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

> API servers with feature enabled will experience different latency and throughput of LIST requests.

Reviewer: Make it explicit that it's not a workload feature (so can't impact already running workloads).

Also, make it expicit that now LIST requests can be failing (if watchcache is lagging).

Author: Done

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> Users should check for increase if their apiserver latency and

Reviewer: Any estimation what values of such metric we generally expect? I'm assuming it will be a histogram?

Author: I think 99%ile of apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait be below 100ms (period of fetching progress request).

the `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric for direct impact of this feature to it.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

No need for tests as this feature only change apiserver behavior without any perisstent side effects.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

We will want to deprecate support of etcd v3.3 in Kubernetes 1.29 and drop the support in v1.32.
etcd v3.3 is almost 6 years old release, is no longer officially supported with the last update being 2 years ago.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

No workload visible change. 

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

> check if `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric is below 100ms.

Reviewer: At what percentile?

Author: Done.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> Use existing kube-apiserver latency SLOs. 

Reviewer: Link

Author: Done

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

> - Metrics

Reviewer: Just link to SLI instead (you're not introducing anything new here).

  - Metric: kube-apiserver latency metric
  - [Optional] Aggregation method: 99 percentile
  - Components exposing the metric: kube-apiserver

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Watch latency metric, however it is not known how to measure it correctly.

> Proposed metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` should be a good enough approximation.

Reviewer: ... approximation of healthiness of this feature.

Author: Done.

Users should check for increase if their apiserver latency and
the `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric for direct impact of this feature to it.

We expect 99th percentile of `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` to be below 200ms.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

No need for tests as this feature only change apiserver behavior without any perisstent side effects.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

We will want to deprecate support of etcd v3.3 in Kubernetes 1.29 and drop the support in v1.32.
etcd v3.3 is almost 6 years old release, is no longer officially supported with the last update being 2 years ago.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

No workload visible change. 

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Check if 99th percentile of `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric is below 200ms.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> Kubernetes non-streaming read-only API call SLO from https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#steady-state-slisslos

Reviewer: No need to repeat the whole wording here - just paste a link to:

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/api_call_latency.md

Author: Done

In default Kubernetes installation, for every (resource, scope) pair, excluding virtual and aggregated resources and Custom Resource Definitions, 99th percentile per cluster-day1 (a) <= 1s if scope=resource (b) <= 30s otherwise (if scope=namespace or scope=cluster)

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

> Kubernetes non-streaming read-only API call SLO from https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#steady-state-slisslos

Reviewer: Same here

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Not a workload feature, so it cannot impact running workload.
API servers with feature enabled will experience different latency and throughput of LIST requests.
If the apiserver watch cache is lagging it might cause a LIST requests to fail.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

Users should check for increase if their apiserver latency and
the `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric for direct impact of this feature to it.

> We expect 99th percentile of `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` to be below 200ms.

Reviewer: Just to clarify: the 200ms was taken as 2 periods of progress notify? If so, can you please add that to the text?

Author: Done

We will want to deprecate support of etcd v3.3 in Kubernetes 1.29 and drop the support in v1.32.
etcd v3.3 is almost 6 years old release, is no longer officially supported with the last update being 2 years ago.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

No workload visible change. 

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Check if 99th percentile of `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` metric is below 200ms.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/api_call_latency.md

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/api_call_latency.md

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Watch latency metric, however it is not known how to measure it correctly.

> Proposed metric `apiserver_watch_cache_read_wait` should be a good enough approximation of healthiness of this feature.

Reviewer: L434 - it depends on the etcd being in high enough version - can you please add it?

Author: Done

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

###### What are other known failure modes?

> - Etcd watch stream starvation

Reviewer: nit: fix indentation

Author: Done
